#summary RDKit build walk through for CentOS 5.5
#labels Notes

_Instructions courtesy of Kirk DeLisle_

You may want to remove old versions of cmake, flex, and bison as these will be rebuilt with the latest versions.  I've completed the process with and without the old versions present and not had any problems with version conflicts. 

Build steps should be done as user, but all install steps must be done as root.


----
*Linear Algebra Libraries*

install atlas, atlas-devel, blas, blas-devel, lapack, lapack-devel through yum.  

These linear algebra libraries are recommended by NumPy 

{{{
yum install atlas, atlas-devel, blas blas-devel lapack lapack-devel
}}}


_EDIT 23 Feb 2011:_

There has been some discussion as to whether these libraries are required or not to build NumPy.  The NumPy documentation states that they are recommended but not required:

http://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/user/install.html:
"NumPy does not require any external linear algebra libraries to be
installed. However, if these are available, NumPy’s setup script can
detect them and use them for building. A number of different LAPACK
library setups can be used, including optimized LAPACK libraries such
as ATLAS, MKL or the Accelerate/vecLib framework on OS X."

In my experience, I received errors during the build process when I didn't have at least one of these installed.  It is likely that all three are not necessary, but I have not isolated them individually to see which ones are disposable.

The standard CentOS repo (base) has blas, blas-devel, lapack, and lapack-devel. For atlas and atlas-devel, you need to enable the epel repository:

rpm -Uvh http://download.fedora.redhat.com/pub/epel/5/i386/epel-release-5-3.noarch.rpm

I also have RPMFusion repositories enabled, but they are not required.  http://www.rpmfusion.org/Configuration

----
*GCC with MPFR 2.4.1*

I have upgraded GCC on my LINUX install to version 4.4.5.  Previously, I found the version of GCC on CentOS (4.1.2-48) to have many bugs, in particular template handling errors which prevented it from properly compiling boost and ultimately breaking the entire process at the last step.  The only remedy I've found is to completely rebuild GCC.  MPFR is a multi-precision floating point math library required for other libraries, so I've simply included it in this build.  I don't know if the newest version of CentOS' GCC (v4.1.2) has this problem, so I rebuilt as a precaution.  (Edit:  4.1.2-48 does have this issue, but I believe it is fixed in 4.1.2-49 - CentOS 5.5 doesn't have that update, however.)
For MPFR 2.4.1, copy the expanded mpfr directory into the top level gcc directory tree as 'mpfr' (no version numbers or dates).  The build process takes care of it after that so you don't have to build and link it on your own.

Create a build directory OUTSIDE the gcc directory structure and do all build steps from there - the build process will take a few hours.

{{{
mkdir gcc-build
cd gcc-build
../gcc-4.4.5/configure
make
make install
}}}

----
*CMake 2.8.2*
{{{
./configure
make
make install
}}}

----
*flex 2.5.35*
{{{
./configure
make
make install
}}}

----
*bison 2.4.2*
{{{
./configure
make
make install
}}}

----
*python 2.7*

Install with -fPIC flags set.
Enable Unicode UCS4 support.
Enable shared library support.
{{{
./configure CFLAGS=-fPIC --enable-unicode=ucs4 --enable-shared
make
make install
}}}
I also made sure Python was built with the newly compiled GCC, and not the system GCC.  On the command line, you should see this:
[GCC 4.4.5] on linux2

At this point you will probably need to add /usr/local:/usr/local/lib:/usr/local/lib64 to the front of LD_LIBRARY_PATH in order for the system to know which version of Python and various libraries should be preferred.
 

----
*NumPy 1.5.0*
{{{
python setup.py build
python setup.py install
}}}
Test this by:
{{{
python
>>> import numpy
>>>
}}}
If you get an error, you've done something wrong.



----
*Boost 1.44.0*
{{{
./bootstrap.sh --with-libraries=python,regex
./bjam address-model=64 cflags=-fPIC cxxflags=-fPIC install 
}}}

----
*RDKit*

Make sure all environment variables are set properly.  For LD_LIBRARY_PATH, you may or may not need /usr/local/lib64 - it seems necessary for me.
{{{
$RDBASE = <the directory where you have installed the RDKit code>
$LD_LIBRARY_PATH = /$RDBASE/lib:/usr/local/lib:/usr/local/lib64
$PYTHONPATH = $RDBASE
}}}
{{{
cd $RDBASE
mkdir build
cd build
cmake -D BOOST_USE_STATIC_LIBS=OFF -D BOOST_ROOT=/usr/local ..
make
make install
}}}


----
*FreeType 2.4.3*
{{{
./configure 
make
make install
}}}

----
*PIL 1.1.7*

Modify the FREETYPE_ROOT environment variable (line 40) to point to the directory in which FreeType was built.  In my case, /opt/freetype-2.4.3.
{{{
python setup.py build
python setup.py install
}}}

----
*Aggdraw*

If you use the standard aggdraw package (http://effbot.org/zone/aggdraw-index.htm) you have to use the following compiler flag on 64-bit systems.
{{{
export CFLAGS="-fpermissive"
}}}
One option is to modify the one line of code for 64-bit as discussed here: http://www.mail-archive.com/rdkit-discuss@lists.sourceforge.net/msg01107.html

In /agg2/include/agg_array.h
change line #523 from this:
{{{
unsigned align = (alignment - unsigned(ptr) % > alignment) % alignment;
}}}
to this:
{{{
unsigned align = (alignment - (unsigned long)(ptr) % alignment) % alignment;
}}}
You will also need to modify aggdraw's setup.py line 21 to point to your freetype directory.  Mine:   
{{{
FREETYPE_ROOT="/opt/freetype-2.4.3"
}}}
I can then get aggdraw to build, but running the selftest.py gives a segmentation fault.  If I go ahead and install, it seems to work just fine and the images produced from RDKit are much improved.  The full build process is:
{{{
export CFLAGS="-fpermissive"
python setup.py build_ext -i
python setup.py install
}}}