#summary Instructions for building the source distribution on Linux

The instructions below are for source distributions from May 2008 on. 

== Getting Ready ==
 * You will need the python headers installed. This probably means that you need to install the python-dev package (or whatever it's called) for your linux distribution.
 * You will need to have blas and lapack installed. This is also probably just a matter of finding the appropriate package for your linux.

== Installing Boost ==
  * download the boost source distribution from [http://www.boost.org the boost web site]
  * extract the source to a _non-temporary_ location on your machine, you're going to need it to build the RDKit as well as boost. (e.g. /usr/local/src/boost_1_34_1)
  * read the [http://www.boost.org/more/getting_started/unix-variants.html installation instructions] 
  * build and install the required boost shared libraries: 
    ** `cd $BOOST`
    ** `bjam  --with-thread --with-python release install`


== Building the Code ==
  * follow the Installing Boost instructions above.
  * environment variables:
    ** RDBASE: the root directory of the RDKit distribution (e.g. ~/RDKit)
    ** BOOSTHOME: should be wherever you extracted the boost source (e.g. /usr/local/src/boost_1_34_1)
    ** BOOST_BUILD_PATH: should be the same as $BOOSTHOME
    ** PYTHON_ROOT: wherever python is installed (e.g. /usr)
    ** PYTHON_VERSION: the first two digits of the python version (e.g. 2.5, *not* 2.5.1)
    ** PYTHONPATH: make sure it includes $RDBASE/Python
    ** LD_LIBRARY_PATH: make sure it includes $RDBASE/bin and wherever the boost shared libraries were installed
  * Building: cd to $RDBASE/Code and do `bjam` (this builds all libraries, wrappers, and regression tests). This command will generate a lot of text (mostly compiler warnings), but it should not generate any errors. At the end you should *not* see any messages about failed or skipped targets.


== Testing the Build (optional, but recommended) ==
  * cd to $RDBASE/Code and do `python $RDBASE/Python/TestRunner.py test_list.py`
  * cd to $RDBASE/Code/GraphMol and do `python $RDBASE/Python/TestRunner.py test_list.py`
  * create the databases used by the Python tests, requires sqlite3 to be installed:
    ** `sqlite3 $RDBASE/Data/RDTests.sqlt < $RDBASE/Python/Dbase/testData/RDTests.sqlite`
    ** `sqlite3 $RDBASE/Data/RDData.sqlt < $RDBASE/Python/Dbase/testData/RDData.sqlite`
  * cd to $RDBASE/Python and do: `find . -name 'test_list.py' -exec python $RDBASE/Python/TestRunner.py \{\} >> pytests.out 2>&1 \;`
  * cd to $RDBASE/Projects and do: `python $RDBASE/Python/TestRunner.py test_list.py`