#summary Getting a binary installation working on windows
#labels Tutorial

= Pre-requisites =

== Required ==
 * The windows binary build from http://rdkit.googlecode.com/files/RDKit_2011_03_2.win32.py26.zip
 * Python 2.6 (from http://www.python.org/)
 * numpy (from http://numpy.scipy.org/)
 * PIL: (from http://www.pythonware.com/products/pil/index.htm)

== Recommended ==
 * aggdraw: a library for high-quality drawing in Python. Instructions for downloading are here: http://effbot.org/zone/aggdraw-index.htm The new (as of May 2008) drawing code has been tested with v1.2a3 of aggdraw. Despite the alpha label, the code is stable and functional.
 * matplotlib: a library for scientific plotting from Python. http://matplotlib.sourceforge.net/
 * ipython : a very useful interactive shell (and much more) for Python. http://ipython.scipy.org/dist/
 * win32all: Windows extensions for Python. http://sourceforge.net/projects/pywin32/

= Extract archive =

Put it somewhere without a space in the name, i.e. `c:/`

The rest of this will assume that the installation is in `c:/RDKit_Q12011_2`

= Environment variables =
 * `RDBASE`: `c:/RDKit_Q12011_2`  *Note* this is optional for the Q3 2010 and later releases.
 * `PYTHONPATH`: `%RDBASE%` if there is already a PYTHONPATH, put `;%RDBASE%` at the end.
 * *Releases prior to Q3 2010*: `PATH`: add `;%RDBASE%/bin` to the end
 * *Q3 2010 and more recent releases*: `PATH`: add `;%RDBASE%/lib` to the end

In Win7 systems, you may run into trouble due to missing DLLs, see one thread from the mailing list:
http://www.mail-archive.com/rdkit-discuss@lists.sourceforge.net/msg01632.html

You can download the missing DLLs from here:
http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=5555