#summary A database cartridge for similarity searching.
#labels cartridge

= Introduction =

The cartridge supports Tanimoto and Dice similarity for
both bitmap and count-vector fingerprints and currently supports
RDKit, layered, morgan (ECFP-like), atom-pair, and topological torsion
fingerprinters. Adding a new fingerprinter (either using the RDKit or
some other C/C++ library) is very straightforward. We make use of the
PostgreSQL index system, so searches are fast. Our benchmarking work
was done with a database of about 4 million drug-like compounds.
Searching this database using drug-like molecules as queries and
binary fingerprints typically takes around 4 seconds on a single CPU
(these queries are returning 10s-1000s of results). I have no doubt
that this can be made faster by tuning database parameters (the
results here are for the standard PostgreSQL settings), but we're
pretty happy with things already.

The cartridge also allows substructure searching (using SMILES), but
that's not as highly optimized as the similarity searching. We'll
continue to work on this and will add SMARTS support in the future.

The cartridge builds on linux and the mac. I don't plan to support it
on Windows, but if someone else can get it working there, I'd be happy to
know about it and relay the information.

= Details =

  * BuildingTheCartridge
  * DatabaseCreation
  * ExampleSimilarityQueries
  * ExampleStructureQueries
  * DatabaseCreation2 : an example using the emolecules.com database
  * ReferenceDocumentation : a reference manual for the cartridge functionality.

----
[http://www.postgresql.org http://www.postgresql.org/files/community/propaganda/95x51_4.gif]